# LikertMakeR Scale Reproduction Validation

## LikertMakeR Validation

This paper reports on a study that compares data produced using
*LikertMakeR* with original data from a published and publicly-available
source.

## Abstract

The
[`LikertMakeR::lfast()`](https://winzarh.github.io/LikertMakeR/reference/lfast.md)
function generally produces surprisingly good replications of existing
data.

Data distributions usually are unimodal, so multimodal (or wiggly) data
are poorly represented.

Highly leptokurtic data (pointy with wide tails) also may be poorly
represented.

These exceptions are likely to occur when more than one utility function
is included in the original sample data. That is, when different groups
of respondents are joined together.

## Validation against real data

One objective of the ***LikertMakeR*** package ([Winzar
2022](#ref-winzar2022)) is to “reproduce” or “reverse engineer”
rating-scale data for further analysis and visualization when only
summary statistics are available. In such a role, the synthetic data
should accurately represent the original data, meaning both should
plausibly originate from the same population.

To validate synthetic data, we choose a data set that is readily
available, and which can be filtered to represent rating-scale data that
may be commonly seen in published reports.

We should compare data with variations in:

- sample sizes,
- number of increments in a scale. Number of increments may be defined
  by:
  - number of items in the scale
  - length of the scale item (1 to 5; 0 to 10; *etc.*)
- modality: the extent that a distribution shows bumps or something
  other than a smooth hill.

### SPI (SAPA Personality Inventory)

For convenience and reproducibility, I chose a subsample of the *SAPA
Personality Inventory* ([Condon 2023](#ref-sapaproject)) data available
from the **psych** ([Revelle 2024](#ref-psych)) and **psychtools**
([William Revelle 2024](#ref-psychTools)) packages for **R**. The data
set holds 4000 observations of 145 variables.

#### Variable/ scale selection

The *SPI* is based on a hierarchical framework for assessing personality
at two levels. The higher level has the familiar ***“Big Five”***
factors that have been studied in personality research since the 1980s.

In the *SPI*, each of these five dimensions is represented by the
average of *fourteen* 6-point agree-disagree items. That is, scale
values have a scale with `14 * 6 = 84` possible values.

| Big Five Personality Dimensions |
|:--------------------------------|
| Conscientiousness               |
| Agreeableness                   |
| Neuroticism                     |
| Openness                        |
| Extraversion                    |

The lower level has 27 factors, made by averaging *five* 6-point items,
most of which are sub-scales of the Big Five. These give scales with
`5 * 6 = 30` possible values.

|                    |                  |                         |
|:-------------------|:-----------------|:------------------------|
| Adaptability       | Anxiety          | ArtAppreciation         |
| AttentionSeeking   | Authoritarianism | Charisma                |
| Compassion         | Conformity       | Conservatism            |
| Creativity         | EasyGoingness    | EmotionalExpressiveness |
| EmotionalStability | Honesty          | Humor                   |
| Impulsivity        | Industry         | Intellect               |
| Introspection      | Irritability     | Order                   |
| Perfectionism      | SelfControl      | SensationSeeking        |
| Sociability        | Trust            | WellBeing               |

List of SPI Facets

Finally, these dimensions and facets are made by averaging subsets of
135 items (individual questions). Each item then is a scale with
`1 * 6 = 6` possible values.

| Property                  | Dimensions | Facets | Items |
|:--------------------------|-----------:|-------:|------:|
| Number of scales          |          5 |     27 |   135 |
| Items per scale           |         14 |      5 |     1 |
| Discrete values per scale |         84 |     30 |     6 |

Scale properties under consideration

### Measures of Difference

The function
[`LikertMakeR::lfast()`](https://winzarh.github.io/LikertMakeR/reference/lfast.md)
produces a vector of values with predefined first and second moments
usually correct to two decimal places. Vectors also have exact minima &
maxima, and scale intervals.

To determine whether synthetic data are no different from the data that
produced the original summary statistics, we need something more than
just equal mean and standard deviation. We need measures that can
accommodate third and fourth moments (*skewness* and *kurtosis*) as
well. Further, a comparison should accommodate occasional bimodal
distributions that may occur.

#### Choice of Test for Equal Distributions

To assess the similarity between synthetic data generated by
**LikertMakeR** and real survey data, we evaluate the agreement between
their empirical distributions using *nonparametric two-sample tests*.

Several tests are available for comparing continuous distributions:

- The **Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS)** test focuses on the maximum vertical
  distance between the empirical cumulative distribution functions
  (ECDFs) of the two samples. The *KS* test has reduced sensitivity near
  the centre of the distribution and excessive sensitivity to extreme
  values ([Lilliefors 1967](#ref-Lilliefors1967)).

- The **Baumgartner–Weiß–Schindler (BWS)** test ([Baumgartner, Weiß, and
  Schindler 1998](#ref-Baumgartner1998))  
  improves upon the *KS* test by incorporating differences across the
  entire distribution, using a rank-based test statistic derived from
  integrated spacing differences. The *BWS* test is more powerful than
  either the *Kolmogorov-Smirnov* test or the *Wilcoxon* test ([Pav
  2023](#ref-BWStest-Manual)), as shown in Baumgartner, Weiß, and
  Schindler ([1998](#ref-Baumgartner1998)). It is sensitive to both
  *location and shape* differences and generally has greater power
  across a variety of alternatives ([Neuhäuser
  2001](#ref-Neuh%C3%A4user2001); [Neuhäuser and Ruxton
  2009](#ref-Neuhauser2009)).

- The **Neuhäuser modification** of the *BWS* test introduces a
  *weighting function* that emphasizes differences in the *central
  region* of the distribution while reducing the influence of the tails
  ([Neuhäuser 2001](#ref-Neuh%C3%A4user2001)). This makes it more robust
  to small discrepancies in the extremes — a desirable property in large
  samples where minor tail mismatches can lead to false positives
  ([Neuhäuser 2005](#ref-Neuh_user_2005)).

Overall, The researcher might want to use the *BWS* test to see if
[`LikertMakeR::lfast()`](https://winzarh.github.io/LikertMakeR/reference/lfast.md)
gives an *exact replication* of a scale, and use the *Neuhäuser* test
option to see if the function produces a “pretty good” dataframe. So, we
present summary results for both tests in this study.

| Feature                | method = “BWS”                                    | method = “Neuhäuser”                         |
|:-----------------------|:--------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------|
| Test Statistic         | Based on comparing quantiles                      | Based on comparing ranks.                    |
| Sensitivity            | More sensitive to shape differences.              | Less sensitive to shape differences.         |
| Robustness to Outliers | Less robust to outliers.                          | More robust to outliers.                     |
| Focus                  | Sensitive to general differences across the ranks | Less sensitive to tail differences.          |
| Type of Differences    | More likely to pick up on subtle differences      | Less likely to pick up on subtle differences |

Comparison of BWS and Neuhäuser Methods

## Research Design

We suspect that the accuracy of data created by
[`LikertMakeR::lfast()`](https://winzarh.github.io/LikertMakeR/reference/lfast.md)
will be affected by:

- the shape of the true distribution
- sample-size
- number of discrete intervals in a scale

That is, highly skewed and multimodal distributions, and smaller sample
sizes, are likely to be less well replicated by synthetic data generated
by
[`LikertMakeR::lfast()`](https://winzarh.github.io/LikertMakeR/reference/lfast.md).

### Data selection

The *SPI* dataset includes demographic information on which we can
filter the 4000 observations down to sample-sizes that we are more
likely to find in normal social research. Somewhat arbitrarily, I
decided to use Age, Gender, and Education as filters.

#### Small sample

Young highly-educated men

``` r
young_highly_educated_men <- spi |>
  filter(age < 24 & sex == 1 & education == 7)

## where, sex==1 = 'male'
##        education == 7 = 'postgraduate degree'
```

This filtering produced a sample of 19 observations.

#### Medium sample

Young educated women

``` r
young_educated_women <- spi |>
  filter(age < 24 & sex == 2 & education >= 5)

## where, "sex==2" = 'female'
##        "education >= 5" = 'undergraduate degree or higher'
```

This filtering produced a sample of 99 observations.

#### Large sample

Young school-leavers

``` r
under_18_highschool <- spi |>
  filter(age < 18 & education == 1)

## where, "education == 1" = 'Less than 12 years schooling'
```

This filtering produced a sample of 314 observations.

### Procedure

We have three samples with small, medium and large sample-sizes.

- small, 19 observations
- medium, 99 observations
- large, 314 observations

And we have three levels of data aggregation:

- 5 dimensions, each of 14 items
- 27 factors, each of 5 items
- 135 individual items

This gives us `(3 * (5 + 27 + 135) = 501)` data subsets.

For each combination of sample and data-level we find the mean and
standard deviation of the data subset, then apply the
[`LikertMakeR::lfast`](https://winzarh.github.io/LikertMakeR/reference/lfast.md)
function to produce `2^10 = 1024` simulated dataframes to compare with
the true original dataframes from the SPI data.

We compare the *Empirical Cumulative Density Function* (*ECDF*) of each
simulated dataframe with the *ECDF* of the original dataframe using both
the *BWS* and *Neuhäuser* methods. With more than 1000 tests on each of
501 original dataframes we should be able to see how accurate our
simulations are.

### Original Data

We present charts as summary information about the three levels of data
under consideration. These are bar-charts for each measurement level
combined with *kernel density* estimates.

#### SPI Big Five Dimensions

Each of the Big Five measures is the average of 14 six-point items. So
there are `14 * 6 = 84` potential values in each scale. Note then, how a
small sample size has much more sparse values than a larger sample.

Otherwise, the distributions tend to be unimodal, with fairly smooth
*kernel density* curves.

![Bar and kernel density plots of Big 5 for three
samples](heavy_img/young_highly_educated_men_dims_histograms.png)![Bar
and kernel density plots of Big 5 for three
samples](heavy_img/young_educated_women_dims_histograms.png)![Bar and
kernel density plots of Big 5 for three
samples](heavy_img/under_18_highschool_dims_histograms.png)

Big 5 Dimensions for three samples

#### SPI 27 Facets

Each of the SPI facets is the average of five six-point items, giving
`5 * 6 = 30` potential values in each facet measure.

Again, the distributions tend to be unimodal, with smooth *kernel
density* curves.

![Bar and density plots of 27 facets for three
samples](heavy_img/young_highly_educated_men_facets_histograms.png)![Bar
and density plots of 27 facets for three
samples](heavy_img/young_educated_women_facets_histograms.png)![Bar and
density plots of 27 facets for three
samples](heavy_img/under_18_highschool_facets_histograms.png)

SPI facets for three samples

#### Selected SPI items

We simulated data for 135 individual items - too many to show
meaningfully. We present here a sample of those few that showed unusual
results in the simulations.

In these cases data were either highly skewed, or bimodal (or at least
flat in parts).

![Bar and density plots for selected SPI items for three
samples](heavy_img/selected_items_youngmen.png)![Bar and density plots
for selected SPI items for three
samples](heavy_img/selected_items_youngwomen.png)![Bar and density plots
for selected SPI items for three
samples](heavy_img/selected_items_highschool.png)

Selected SPI items for three samples

## Results

The following tables list the dimension under consideration and the
proportion of cases in each of the three samples that ere
*‘statistically significant’* ($\rho$ \< 0.05).

Tables show the *BWS* test / *Neuhäuser* test.

### Big Five Dimensions validity

Fourteen six-point items (84 levels in scale)

[TABLE]

Proportion of statistically-significant simulations (BWS/Neuhäuser)

With smooth *kernel density estimates*, as we saw above, all cases were
non-significant, suggesting that such data are well-reproduced by the
[`LikertMakeR::lfast()`](https://winzarh.github.io/LikertMakeR/reference/lfast.md)
function.

### SPI Facets (Subscale) validity

Five six-point items (30 potential values in scale)

[TABLE]

Proportion of statistically-significant simulations (BWS/Neuhäuser)

When the *BWS* test is applied to the larger sample, all simulations are
significantly different from the original data. This is probably due to
the smaller standard error produced by a larger sample.

Interestingly, the *Neuhäuser* test, which is less sensitive to
outliers, suggested that all simulations are good representations of the
original.

The facet, *Introspection*, stands out as one that is rarely accurately
reproduced by the
[`LikertMakeR::lfast()`](https://winzarh.github.io/LikertMakeR/reference/lfast.md)
function, using the *BWS* test, regardless of sample size.

Other facets that are worth exploring in more detail are: *Compassion*,
*Humor*, *Intellect*, *SelfControl*, *EasyGoingness*, and
*Perfectionism*. These facets have high rates of significance in the
mid-sample-size condition.

#### Focus on “Introspection” facet

The following chart shows *kernel density* plots for facet
*Introspection* in the three samples.

Each of the 1024 synthetic dataframes is represented by a grey/black
line, and the original *“true”* dataframe is represented by a blue/cyan
line.

![density plots for 'Introspection' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Introspection_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![density
plots for 'Introspection' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Introspection_Density_young_educated_women.png)![density
plots for 'Introspection' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Introspection_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

Introspection facet: Density plot for small, medium and large samples

We see that the synthetic data never match the true data, especially in
the middle and large sample sizes.

The original, true, data are highly left-skewed, and this has been
nicely captured by the synthetic data. Note, however, that the true
dataframe is not unimodal. The *kernel density* estimate appears rough
and slightly multimodal. It’s more wobbly.

#### focus on “Compassion” facet

The following chart shows *kernel density* plots for facet *Compassion*
in the three samples.

Again, each of the 1024 synthetic dataframes is represented by a
grey/black line, and the original *“true”* dataframe is represented by a
blue/cyan line.

![kernel density plots for 'Compassion' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Compassion_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![kernel
density plots for 'Compassion' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Compassion_Density_young_educated_women.png)![kernel
density plots for 'Compassion' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Compassion_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

Compassion facet: Kernel Density plots for small, medium and large
samples

For this factor the *BWS test* showed no cases where the synthetic data
were significantly different from the original data for the smaller
sample. But for the medium and large samples, the original data are not
unimodal, and the *BWS test* suggests that all synthetic replications
are different from the original.

##### Other notable facets

###### Humor

![kernel density plots for 'Humor' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Humor_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![kernel
density plots for 'Humor' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Humor_Density_young_educated_women.png)![kernel
density plots for 'Humor' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Humor_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

Humor facet: Kernel Density plots for small, medium and large samples

###### Intellect

![kernel density plots for 'Intellect' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Intellect_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![kernel
density plots for 'Intellect' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Intellect_Density_young_educated_women.png)![kernel
density plots for 'Intellect' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Intellect_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

Intellect facet: Kernel Density plots for small, medium and large
samples

###### SelfControl

![kernel density plots for 'SelfControl' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/SelfControl_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![kernel
density plots for 'SelfControl' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/SelfControl_Density_young_educated_women.png)![kernel
density plots for 'SelfControl' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/SelfControl_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

SelfControl facet: Kernel Density plots for small, medium and large
samples

###### EasyGoingness

![kernel density plots for 'EasyGoingness' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/EasyGoingness_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![kernel
density plots for 'EasyGoingness' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/EasyGoingness_Density_young_educated_women.png)![kernel
density plots for 'EasyGoingness' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/EasyGoingness_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

EasyGoingness facet: Kernel Density plots for small, medium and large
samples

###### Perfectionism

![kernel density plots for 'Perfectionism' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Perfectionism_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![kernel
density plots for 'Perfectionism' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Perfectionism_Density_young_educated_women.png)![kernel
density plots for 'Perfectionism' facet for three
samples](heavy_img/Perfectionism_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

Perfectionism facet: Kernel Density plots for small, medium and large
samples

### SPI Item validity

Each scale is a single six-point item.

In almost all cases, the *Baumgartner–Weiß–Schindler* (BWS) test showed
a statistically significant difference between actual data and synthetic
data. In most cases, however, the *Neuhäuser* test, which is more robust
to outliers, was not statistically significant.

The appendix table shows summary results for the three data sets for all
135 items, indicating the proportion of cases where distribution
comparison tests were *‘statistically significant’* ($\rho$ \< 0.05).

In about 37 of the 135 items (27%) did the BWS test show proportion of
significant simulations less than 80%.

The following are some sample item results for each of the three samples

### Original data histograms

![kernel density plots for young highly-educated
men](heavy_img/young_highly_educated_men_histograms.png)

Selected items

![kernel density plots for young educated
women](heavy_img/young_educated_women_histograms.png)

Selected items

![kernel density plots for under-18 high-school
education](heavy_img/under_18_highschool_histograms.png)

Selected items

### Synthetic data density plots

#### q_1685 ‘Seldom joke around’

![kernel density plots for 'q_1685 Seldom joke around' item for three
samples](heavy_img/q_1685_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![kernel
density plots for 'q_1685 Seldom joke around' item for three
samples](heavy_img/q_1685_Density_young_educated_women.png)![kernel
density plots for 'q_1685 Seldom joke around' item for three
samples](heavy_img/q_1685_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

q_1685 ‘Seldom joke around’: Kernel Density plots for small, medium and
large samples

#### q_1896 ‘Use others for my own ends’

![kernel density plots for 'q_1058 Use others for my own ends' item for
three
samples](heavy_img/q_1896_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![kernel
density plots for 'q_1058 Use others for my own ends' item for three
samples](heavy_img/q_1896_Density_young_educated_women.png)![kernel
density plots for 'q_1058 Use others for my own ends' item for three
samples](heavy_img/q_1896_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

q_1058 ‘Use others for my own ends’: Kernel Density plots for small,
medium and large samples

#### q_1989 ‘Worry about things’

![kernel density plots for 'q_1058 Use others for my own ends' item for
three
samples](heavy_img/q_1989_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![kernel
density plots for 'q_1058 Use others for my own ends' item for three
samples](heavy_img/q_1989_Density_young_educated_women.png)![kernel
density plots for 'q_1058 Use others for my own ends' item for three
samples](heavy_img/q_1989_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

q_1989 ‘Worry about things’: Kernel Density plots for small, medium and
large samples

#### q_755 ‘Enjoy examining myself and my life’

![kernel density plots for 'q_755 Enjoy examining myself and my life'
item for three
samples](heavy_img/q_755_Density_young_highly_educated_men.png)![kernel
density plots for 'q_755 Enjoy examining myself and my life' item for
three samples](heavy_img/q_755_Density_young_educated_women.png)![kernel
density plots for 'q_755 Enjoy examining myself and my life' item for
three samples](heavy_img/q_755_Density_under_18_highschool.png)

q_755 ‘Enjoy examining myself and my life’: Kernel Density plots for
small, medium and large samples

## Summary Results

Results are much as we might expect:

### Unimodal data are good, multimodal less so

Multimodal data are not well-represented by the
[`LikertMakeR::lfast()`](https://winzarh.github.io/LikertMakeR/reference/lfast.md)
function, which consistently generates unimodal data.

### Larger sample sizes produce smoother unimodal data distributions

Original data in the very small sample size in the 19-subjects group
frequently were multimodal, whereas original data from the medium-sized
and large-sized groups were more often unimodal.

### Sample size alone does not affect accuracy of data synthisis.

There did not seem to be much difference in results for different sample
sizes.

### Third and Fourth moments can affect accurcy

Leptokurtic (pointy) distributions and platykurtic (flatter)
distributions seem to affect results. We shouldn’t be surprised since
the generating algorithm focuses on first (mean) and second (standard
deviation) moments.

## Appendix

### Summary results for individual items

Rating scale items ranging from ‘1’ to ‘6’ from the SPI data set, for
three samples of different sizes.

[TABLE]

Proportion of statistically-significant simulations (BWS/Neuhauser)

## References

Baumgartner, W., P. Weiß, and H. Schindler. 1998. “A Nonparametric Test
for the General Two-Sample Problem.” *Biometrics* 54 (3): 1129–35.
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2533862>.

Condon, David M. 2023. “SAPA-Project \| Your Customized Personality
Profile Report — Sapa-Project.org.” <https://www.sapa-project.org/>.

Lilliefors, Hubert W. 1967. “On the Kolmogorov–Smirnov Test for
Normality with Mean and Variance Unknown.” *Journal of the American
Statistical Association* 62 (318): 399–402.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1967.10482916>.

Neuhäuser, Markus. 2001. “One-Sided Two-Sample and Trend Tests Based on
a Modified Baumgartner-Weiss-Schindler Statistic.” *Journal of
Nonparametric Statistics* 13 (5): 729–39.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10485250108832874>.

———. 2005. “Exact Tests Based on the Baumgartner-Weiß-Schindler
Statistic—a Survey.” *Statistical Papers* 46 (1): 1–29.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/bf02762032>.

Neuhäuser, Markus, and Graeme D. Ruxton. 2009. “Distribution-Free
Two-Sample Comparisons in the Presence of Heteroscedasticity.”
*Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology* 62 (3): 453–60.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s00265-008-0683-4>.

Pav, Steven E. 2023. *BWStest: Baumgartner Weiß Schindler Test of Equal
Distributions*. <https://github.com/shabbychef/BWStest>.

Revelle, William. 2024. *Psych: Procedures for Psychological,
Psychometric, and Personality Research*. Evanston, Illinois:
Northwestern University. <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=psych>.

William Revelle. 2024. *psychTools: Tools to Accompany the ’Psych’
Package for Psychological Research*. Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern
University. <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=psychTools>.

Winzar, Hume. 2022. *LikertMakeR: Synthesise and Correlate Likert-Scale
and Related Rating-Scale Data with Predefined First & Second Moments*
(version 1.1.0 (2025)). *The Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN)*.
<https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=LikertMakeR>.
